<!-- NOTE! This file is autogenerated from files under stack/maximasrc do not edit here. -->
# Section documentation for /strings/escapes

A collection of functions meant for escaping Maxima strings for use in
other languages. Primarilly useful for transferring content to scripts.


## str_to_html<a id='str_to_html'></a>

A function to convert a string to an escaped HTML/XML string.

Do note that this is not idempotent, and will escape the escaped things if
the original already uses entities.

@param[string] string_to_escape, the string to be escaped.
@return[string] a string with all characters sensitive in HTML/XML turned to entities.


## str_to_html_char<a id='str_to_html_char'></a>

A function to convert singular characters to HTML/XML-entities if necessary.

Note that [`str_to_html`](#str_to_html) is probably the more convenient function, if you are not
testing chars one by one.

@param[string] c, a single character string.
@return[string] a string with a character sensitive in HTML/XML turned to an entity if necessary.


## str_to_js<a id='str_to_js'></a>

A function to convert a string to an escaped JavaScript string.

Do note that this is not idempotent, and will escape the escaped things if
the original already uses escapes.

Does not add quotes of any kind at the ends of the string. So wrap your output
in a sensible way e.g. `var str="{@str_to_js(someMaximaString)@}";`.

Also be aware that if you are doing this in CASText there exists a block that
generates fully wrapped JavaScript strings from whatever CASText contents the block has
it may be simpler to use than first constructing a separate Maxima string. You could
use it like this, inseide a CASText segment:
```
var str= [[jsstring]]Something with {@injections@}, or other CASText.[[/jsstring]];
```

@param[string] string_to_escape, the string to be escaped.
@return[string] a string with all characters sensitive in HTML/XML turned to entities.


## str_to_js_char<a id='str_to_js_char'></a>

A function to convert singular characters to escaped sequence if necessary, for use in JavaScript "strings".

Note that [`str_to_js`](#str_to_js) is probably the more convenient function, if you are not
testing chars one by one.

@param[string] c, a single character string.
@return[string] a string with a character potenttially sensitive in JS strings turned to an escape sequence if necessary.

